---
layout: post
title:  "Relational databases cheatsheet"
date:   2021-02-24 12:00:00 +0100
categories: database
tags: math
---
Course info:

{% include math.html %}

Builds on DBWEB until midterm. This part focuses on physical models and Data Models. (not the modelling "schemas").

<!--more-->

## Table of contents
- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Databases](#databases)
- [Data Modelling (schemas)](#data-modelling-schemas)
- [Data models (general models)](#data-models-general-models)
- [Relational Model](#relational-model)
  - [Keys](#keys)
- [Normalization](#normalization)
  - [1NF](#1nf)
  - [2NF](#2nf)
  - [3NF](#3nf)
- [SQL](#sql)
- [Transactions](#transactions)
- [High-level architecture](#high-level-architecture)
- [NoSQL and NewSQL](#nosql-and-newsql)

## Databases

* Relational databases amount for a **30 billion per year** industry
* Databases store and manage **almost all transactions in the world**
* **Simplify** the life of programmers
* Relational databases are based on **set theory**, more specifically on "relational algebra" and "relational calculus"
* **SQL** is a simple **high-level language** for querying data in wich the user **declares** the final output, but does **not define** how to get it.
  * Things like **query optimizers** make sure to deliver the declared intended result in the most efficent way
* Database Management System (**DBMS**) matains the databases
  * Defines data (type, normalization, constrains) and structure (tables and relations)
  * Physical construction (in storage)
  * Data manipulation (SCRUD)
  * Sharing/protecting (views,user rights)
  * persistence (ACID transaction (all-in or nothing))/recovery (states are reversible)

## Data Modelling (schemas)
* From ER schemas (i.e. chen's notation) to relational logical schemas (tables with foreign keys)
* **Which data is included and how it is structured**.

* 3 phases:
  * **Conceptual design** (UML, chen, EER...)
    * Which entites should be stored? what are their properties? how are they related?
  * **Logical design** (tables, columns, FK, PK...)
    * Which relations should exist? Which attributes do they have? what are the domains (data types) of the attributes, and their constraints?
  * **Physical design** (tablespaces, indexes...)
    * Where and how to store relations, what to index, what metadata to collect?

## Data models (general models)

* Data models (in a broader sense, not specifically the previous schemas) define **how data is represented and manipulated**.
  * The Document Model
  * The Graph Model
  * Key Value-Model
  * Wide_Columnar Model
  * Knowledge graph models

## Relational Model

* Based on relation**s**
  * Set of tuples i.e.

  $$MyFamSiblings\{(Alex,Sergio),(Alex,Tamara),(Sergio,Alex),\\ (Sergio,Tamara),(Tamara,Alex),(Tamara,Sergio)\}$$

  * The **logical schema** of the secion above specifies the **domain**, in this case could be "people".
  * The **constraint** would be that among those people, their mother is also my mother. 
  * A single relation i.e. (Alex,Sergio) is a subset of the whole set of MyFamSiblings.
    * In this case the cartesian product of Alex,Sergio,Tamara would produce MyFamSiblings
    * In some occasaions the cartersian product does not reflect the real relation (something to be aware of when making queries, as the cartesian product is often an inbetween step for easy compatibility, but things can go wrong, i.e. relations that do not exist may show up)
* A **relational database schema** consists of:
  * set of relation schemas (such as siblings, marriages)
  * Set of integrity constraints (such as Siblings shall not be married)
* A **relational dabasse instance** or state is a "snapshot" of the database (where all constraints are respected)
* **Data Definition Language (DDL)** defines the relation schemas and integrity constraints.
* **Data Manipulation Language (DML)** handles and manipulate the tuples (i.e. actual records in a database table (relation))
* **SQL is used for both DDL and DML**

### Keys

* Primary key (pk): uniquely identifier for a record in a table
* Foreign key (fk): attribute that can be link to a foreign table's primary key (often used for queries to merge data from different tables)
* candidate key: irreducible set of attribute(s) that uniquely identify a tuple.

## Normalization

### 1NF

* No composite fields (i.e. address has to be split into separate fields: postcode, street, city, house number...)
* No lists (i.e. instead of "calculus, algebra, java, web" make a new relation with a table that links students with courses enrolled)

### 2NF

* All columns in a table must depend on the **entire key**
  * Sometimes the entire key is a **composite key** (more than 1 field) and some attributes shown in the table are not really relevant to the whole key, but to a subset. Those attributes are already dependent on another attribute, so they can be safely refractored to another table.

### 3NF

* Attributes depend **directly** on the **entire key**. 3NF has to be 2NF and 1NF, (same holds for 2NF that needs to also be 1NF). The added constraint is that eventhough some attributes do indeed dependend on the entire key, they do it just because a foreign key is dependent on the primary key. For example, a course can have a course id as primary key, name, credits, semester, teacher id, *teacher name...*. Yes, the teacher name depends on the course id, but it can be refractored to a "teacher table" since teacher id is already linked to the course id.
* This is also known as **"no transitivity"**

## SQL

* Queries
  * SELECT
* Data Manipulation
  * INSERT
  * UPDATE
  * DELETE
* Data Definition Language
  * CREATE TABLE
  * ALTER TABLE
  * DROP TABLE

## Transactions

* **Atomic** multi-user transactions
* Contain multiple changes that must all be commited or aborted as a single unit and follows ACID principles:
  * Atomicity
    * A transaction is either executed or not
  * Consistency
    * A transaction must result in a legal database state
  * Isolation
    * Other transactions running on parallel do not affect it
  * Durability
    * A successful transaction has permanent effect on the database

## High-level architecture

* The **storage manager** is responsible for
  * storage access
  * file organization
  * indexing and hashing
* The **query processor** parses, optimizes and evalutes queries.
  * Alternatives ways for the query
  * Selection based on cost
    * Which depends on statistical information about relations mantained by the DBMS
* The **transaction manager**
  * Ensures a correct database state despite system failures
  * Controls interactions between transactions to ensure database consistency

## NoSQL and NewSQL

* New tools for new purposes with pros and pros
  * Con: not as fast as relational databases (for relational queries)
  * Pro: can do other stuff well
* Tradeoffs:
  * Transactional consistency for scalability
  * Power for scalability
  * Optimization for flexibility
  
* NoSQL is completely sacrifices core features of RDBMS while NewSQL is a compromise in between NoSQL and Relational Dabases